Curv is an open source 3D solid modelling language, oriented towards 3D printing,
procedurally generated art, and mathematical visualization.

It's a pure functional language where geometric shapes are first class values,
and are constructed by transforming and combining simpler shapes using an
unusually rich collection of operators.

Instead of polyhedral meshes or other boundary representations, Curv represents
shapes as pure functions (Function Representation or F-Rep). This is a volumetric
representation, where a function maps every point (x,y,z) in 3D space onto the
properties of a shape. This representation is powerful, supporting a wide range
of shape operators, and is a good match to the volumetric nature of 3D printing.

F-Rep is well suited to being directly rendered by a GPU. To achieve this,
Curv code is compiled into GPU shader programs or compute kernels.

----------------
What the audience can expect to learn from your talk. - Why you think the topic of the talk is interesting, important, cool etc.

The goals of Curv, and my Curv talk, for StarCon:

* make programming accessible to everyone
* create a culture that fosters learning and community building through knowledge sharing
* share my interest and passion, inspire others to do the same
* share my curiosity, failures, and excitement
* encourage others to make connections, share ideas, form friendships

-----------------
What is Curv?
What are the goals?
How are those goals achieved?
How am I doing so far in achieving these goals?
---
Curv is an open source 3D solid modelling language, oriented towards 3D printing, procedurally generated art, and mathematical visualization.

It's easy to use for beginners. It's incredibly powerful for experts.
And it's fast: all rendering is performed by the GPU.

Curv is also a uniquely expressive file format for the exchange of 2D and 3D
procedurally generated graphics.

Thesis
======
Ease of use:
  For ease of use, the best choice is Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG)
  embedded in a simple, pure functional language.

Rendering Speed:
  To quickly render a wide range of CSG primitives,
  the best choice is to render on a GPU,
  and to represent shapes using Function Representation (F-Rep).

Expressive Power:
  F-Rep is the best choice for CSG:
  A wider range of CSG primitives are available in Open Source for F-Rep
  than for competing representations.
  
  To boost expressiveness,
  the Curv language permits experts to define new CSG primitives using F-Rep.
  (Therefore, Curv functions must be compilable into GPU code.)
  
  F-Rep is the most expressive representation for controlling a 3D printer.
  It can describe 3D-printable objects that can't be modeled by competing representations.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Curv: A Language for Making Art using Mathematics

Curv is an open source software project that I'm developing on github.
It's a programming language for creating mathematics-based art.
It can create images, animations, and 3D printable solid models.
