Creative Coding: Making Art on a 3D Printer
-------------------------------------------
"Creative Coding" is the act of writing a computer program to make art,
or create an esthetic experience. It can be a fun and rewarding way to
engage in computer programming.

I make trippy, abstract geometric art using a 3D printer.
I write programs to generate the designs. This is called "Generative Art".
It's also called "Parametric Design", because you define
numeric parameters that control what gets generated. By tweaking the parameters,
you can explore a design space and find the one that best expresses your
artistic goals.

Sometimes, in Creative Coding, the source code for the program is considered
to be a part of the art work. I want to write short, beautiful programs, and
share them so that other people can understand and modify them.

I wanted an easy, open source tool for writing these programs
and generating 3D printable model files. Nothing existing supported the
full range of modelling techniques I wanted to explore,
so I started my own open source project.

In this talk, I will show a variety of techniques for generating 3D shapes,
and demo them using my software.

I will also describe the underlying technology, "signed distance fields".
I'll explain why it is better suited for parametric design and 3D printing
than the conventional technology used in most 3D CAD and sculpturing programs,
and why recent advances in GPUs have made the technology more practical.

Timeline
--------
* Introduction 3
* Techniques and Live Programming Demo
  * eg, fractals 3
  * eg, lattices and voronoi patterns 3
  * eg, blending and morphing 3
* Technology 3

Why do you want to talk at StarCon?
-----------------------------------
I want to share my ideas and inspire other people.
* Writing programs that make art is a fun and gentle introduction to
  programming. You can write simple programs and get immediate visual feedback,
  and even bugs can lead to interesting results. Maybe this is a way to
  get a more diverse group of people interested in computer programming.
* 3D printers are cool, but they are even cooler if you can design and print
  your own art. The approach I use is accessible to people without conventional
  artistic skills, and I want to raise awareness.
* Writing and delivering this presentation will be a lot of work, but it will
  help me to refine my message and learn how to communicate it to others.
* I would like to meet other people at Star Con with related interests and
  learn from them.

BIO
---
Doug Moen is a computer programmer, maker, and aspiring digital artist
from Waterloo, Ontario. He works on the Curv open source software project,
and is a member of the Kwartzlab makerspace, where he makes things using
the 3D printer and the laser cutter. Doug is also a trustee for the KW
Awesome Foundation, which funds awesome community projects.

Creative Coding
---------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_coding
