A Term is an expression comprised of chained function calls, field
selections, and array indexes.

Use cases (and the need for chaining):
* field selection and array indexing for data structure traversal.
* field selection and function call in the terms used for Named Values.
* `smooth r .union [s1, s2]`

What is the syntax of a Term?
* How this syntax support chaining?
* How does the Curv formatter render a term in 'standard' style?
* What happens to the syntax when a long term is split over multiple lines?

The Current Design
------------------
I already have answers to these questions.

Function call `f x`, field selection `r.n` and array indexing `a.[i]`
are postfix operations with the same precedence (left associative).
Equal precedence means chaining is supported.

There are two standard styles, the 'tight' style, and the 'loose' style.
Tight:
    f(x).foo.[i]
Loose:
    f x .foo .[i]
Both styles support chaining (parentheses don't pile up at the start of
the term when you add more qualifiers to the end of the term).

The loose style is required when splitting a long term over multiple lines.
The loose style looks better for calling a curried function:
    f(a)(b)(c)  vs  f a b c
The tight style looks better for dotted names:
    a.b.c
You can begin a term in the tight style and end it in the loose style.
    a.b.c x y z
You get an "ambiguous syntax" warning if you switch from loose to tight
in the middle of a term:
    f R.x
since this looks like it is intended to be parsed as `f(R.x)`.

I get pushback from users, especially in the absence of good documentation
and guidance.
* There is a strong expectation that dotted names are written in tight style.
  People don't even recognize `a .b` as a dotted name.
  * I've seen this multiple times in my career, including C programmers who
    don't realize that '.' is a distinct token that can be preceded and
    followed by whitespace. Maybe it's related to the fact that the decimal
    point in a numeral *cannot* be preceded or followed by space.
* People use whitespace to indicate grouping, then are surprised if the code
  isn't parsed the way they expect based on their whitespace. People are
  also very sure that using whitespace to guide parsing is a terrible idea.
* For example, `f a.b` is expected to mean `f(a.b)`, which is totally
  natural and expected.

Document the current design and educate users, or change the design
to match common expectations about the dot operator?

Sometimes the Curv formatter needs to split a long term across multiple
lines. Loose style supports this case. If I try to guarantee that
dot is never preceded or followed by space when splitting over multiple
lines then the results are atrocious.

The Dot Operator
----------------
 1. Does '.' bind tighter than juxtaposition, or have the same precedence?
    Right now, same precedence, so that you can chain terms.
     * Other people would prefer that 'f R.x' should mean 'f(R.x)'
       which kind of makes visual sense since the space character in
       juxtaposition visually binds looser than the dot with no
       adjacent white space.
 
 2. If 'smooth R' is a record, then what is the preferred coding style
    for selecting the field 'union' from the record?
     * I personally use 'smooth R .union'. My defence of the syntax:
       * chainability.
       * if a long term extends over multiple lines, you will do this anyway.
     * Len's first reaction to this is: 'what does '.union' mean?
       Is that a symbol value? His suggestion is to write
         (smooth R).union
       instead, which he calls 'Lisp-like'. This looks nice but it
       subverts the chainability of the current precedence rules.
       It's quite consistent with a higher precedence dot operator.
     * My alternative idea is 'smooth(R).union', which is chainable, C style,
       and gets rid of the white space. But it goes against the Haskell
       style of no superfluous parens around a function argument, and always
       adding a space between a function and its argument.

There does seem to be a widespread bias that the dot operator should
be written with no adjacent white space. And there's a bias that it should
bind very tightly.

In ML derived functional languages with 'f x' function calls,
it is common for dot of record selection to bind tighter than
juxtaposition function call, which reflects this bias.

The design of terms in Curv derives from C, where funcall and dot have
the same binding strength. But C also uses 'f(x)' as the conventional
style for function call, and 'R.x' as the conventional style for record
selection, no spaces in either case.

I seem to have three alternatives:

 Dot and Juxta have equal binding strength.
  a. smooth R .union        -- me
  b. smooth(R).union        -- more C like
 Dot binds tighter than Juxta.
  c. (smooth R).union

I would like an algorithm for automatically formatting Curv.
It needs to handle the case where a long term wraps line boundaries.

If I use (a.) with total consistency, then it's
    foo .bar
instead of
    foo.bar

------
smooth r . union is just the same as smooth(r).union. Getting rid of the parens and adding spaces really throws people off, but it's consistent with Haskell syntax in my opinion. Even in C you can write foo . bar instead of foo.bar and it is the same thing. If smooth r is a record, when what syntax do you think I should use to select the field union from the record?
lee
 —
Today at 7:11 PM
Oh!
I would preferably keep the parens in. It's not clear that's what it really means!
(smooth r).union is how I would write it
(more lisp-like)
