I'm intrigued by Dan Friedman's new book "The Little Typer".
Friedman's perspective is that languages should either have no types,
or they should have dependent types, because weaker type systems are
too restricted and frustrating. Dependent types are elegant and expressive:
they allow you to use the same language for both programs and types.

Dependent type checking can guarantee that code doesn't diverge or encounter
a run-time error (at the cost of outlawing general recursion), but this is
exactly what we want for code that runs on a GPU. A hybrid type system that
combines dynamic and dependent typing seems like an excellent fit for Curv.

I'm intrigued by Friedman's language, Pie, which is an extremely simple
implementation of dependent types. I'm intrigued by the fact that they
can compare two functions for equality, which arises as a design issue in Curv.

Curv is philosopically a dynamically typed language, but the SubCurv compiler
introduces static types, which introduces stupid language limitations.
Since I must have types anyway, and their limitations frustrate me,
should I be using dependent types? SubCurv should be dependently typed.

Much research into dependent type systems focusses on using dependent types
to prove theorums, which creates a lot of difficulty for users, alleviated
by interactive theorum proving assistants that automate a lot of the work.
This is irrelevant and counterproductive when Curv is used as a live
programming environment for artists.

However, we can view Curv as a hybrid language supporting both "carpentry"
and "architecture": the latter is more structured and painstaking, requiring
expert skills, but is appropriate for library/API and language design. I'm
impressed by the book "Algebra Directed Programming", which describes a
painstaking process of modelling APIs using algebras and algebraic laws,
with the benefit of producing beautiful, simple, composable and expressive
library APIs. The automation and tooling desired for reasoning about algebraic
laws could be provided in the context of a dependent type system, probably.

I want to increase the size of the SubCurv dialect so that more programs can
be compiled into GPU code, and a dependent type system would do this.

I'm already planning to introduce Types as first class values.
What dependent types add is some kind of logic system.

What about Gradual Dependent Types?
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.06469 Aug 2019
  Abstract
    Dependent types help programmers write highly reliable code. However,
    this reliability comes at a cost: it can be challenging to write new
    prototypes in (or migrate old code to) dependently-typed programming
    languages. Gradual typing makes static type disciplines more flexible, so
    an appropriate notion of gradual dependent types could fruitfully lower
    this cost. However, dependent types raise unique challenges for gradual
    typing. Dependent typechecking involves the execution of program code,
    but gradually-typed code can signal runtime type errors or diverge. These
    runtime errors threaten the soundness guarantees that make dependent
    types so attractive, while divergence spoils the type-driven programming
    experience.

    This paper presents GDTL, a gradual dependently-typed language that
    emphasizes pragmatic dependently-typed programming. GDTL fully embeds
    both an untyped and dependently-typed language, and allows for smooth
    transitions between the two. In addition to gradual types we introduce
    gradual terms, which allow the user to be imprecise in type indices
    and to omit proof terms; runtime checks ensure type safety. To account
    for nontermination and failure, we distinguish between compile-time
    normalization and run-time execution: compile-time normalization is
    approximate but total, while runtime execution is exact, but may fail
    or diverge. We prove that GDTL has decidable typechecking and satisfies
    all the expected properties of gradual languages. In particular,
    GDTL satisfies the static and dynamic gradual guarantees: reducing
    type precision preserves typedness, and altering type precision does
    not change program behavior outside of dynamic type failures. To prove
    these properties, we were led to establish a novel normalization gradual
    guarantee that captures the monotonicity of approximate normalization
    with respect to imprecision.

  Introduction
    Dependently-typed extensions of practical programming languages maintain
    a clear phase distinction between compile-time typechecking and runtime
    execution, and have to embrace some compromise regarding impurity. One
    possibility is to forbid potentially impure expressions from occurring in
    types, either by considering a separate pure sub-language of type-level
    computation as in Dependent ML, by using an effect system and termination
    checker to prevent impurity to leak in type dependencies as in F⋆ and
    Idris, or by explicitly separating the language into two fragments with
    controlled interactions between them, as in Zombie. A radical alternative
    is to give up on decidable typechecking and logical consistency altogether
    and give all responsibility to the programmer, as in Dependent Haskell. The
    design space is wide, and practical dependently-typed programming is a
    fertile area of research.

"Dynamic Typing with Dependent Types"
https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~dpw/papers/DTDT-tr.pdf
Xinming Ou, Gang Tan, Yitzhak Mandelbaum, and David Walker, 2004
    Subexpressions may be either dependently typed (at the cost of 10-20% of
    the code being type annotations), or it may be "simply typed" (which seems
    to mean dynamically typed: no type annotations). You can also declare the
    type of a function using dependent types, then supply an untyped body.

    Dependently typed code cannot diverge or encounter a run time error.
    That's exactly what we want for code that runs on a GPU.
    A subset of the language, pure expressions, supports the ability to
    compare two expressions for equivalence. Pure expressions cannot be
    recursive, but again, that's also a requirement for GPU code.
